                          ENGINEERING DRAWING
                                       ENME 101

Lecture       :2                                                                   Year : I
Tutorial      :0                                                                   Part : I
Practical     :4

Course Objectives:

To develop basic projection concepts with reference to points, lines, planes and
geometrical solids. Also, to develop sketching and drafting skills to facilitate
communication.

1    Instrumental Drawing, Technical Lettering Practices and Techniques
                                                                     (1 hour)
    1.1     Equipment, materials and drawing sheets
    1.2     Description of drawing instruments, auxiliary equipment and drawing
            materials
    1.3     Techniques of instrumental drawing
    1.4     Pencil sharpening, securing paper, proper use of T- squares, triangles,
            scales dividers, compasses, erasing shields, French curves, inking pens
    1.5     Line: Types and uses, thickness

2    Dimensioning                                                              (1 hour)
    2.1     Fundamentals and techniques
    2.2     Size and location dimensioning, SI conversions
    2.3     Scales: Types and representative factor
    2.4     Use of scales, measurement units, reducing and enlarging drawings
    2.5     Placement of dimensions: Aligned and unidirectional, chain,
            parallel/baseline and combined type
    2.6     Tolerance dimensioning

3    Geometrical Construction                                                  (2 hours)
    3.1     Plane geometrical construction: Proportional division of lines, trisection of
            angles, smooth arc and line tangents
    3.2     Methods for drawing regular polygons and standard curves such as
            ellipses, parabolas, hyperbolas, involutes, spirals, cycloids and helices
            (Cylindrical and conical), ogee curve
    3.3     Techniques to reproduce a given drawing (By construction)
4   Basic Descriptive Geometry                                                  (4 hours)
    4.1    Introduction to orthographic projection, principal planes, four quadrants or
           angles
    4.2    Projection of points on first, second, third and fourth quadrants
    4.3    Projection of lines: Parallel to one of the principal planes, inclined to one of
           the principal plane and parallel to other, Inclined to both principal planes,
           traces of a line
    4.4    Projection planes: Perpendicular to both principal planes, parallel to one of
           the principal planes and Inclined to one of the principal planes,
           perpendicular to other and Inclined to both principal planes
    4.5    True length of lines: Horizontal, inclined and oblique lines
    4.6    Rules for parallel and perpendicular lines
    4.7    Point view or end view of a line
    4.8    Shortest distance from a point to a line
    4.9    Edge view and true shape of an oblique plane
    4.10   Angle between two intersecting lines
    4.11   Intersection of a line and a plane, visible portion of line
    4.12   Angle between a line and a plane
    4.13   Dihedral angle between two planes
    4.14   Shortest distance between two skew lines
    4.15   Angle between two non-intersecting (Skew) lines

5   Multi View (Orthographic) Projections                                       (8 hours)
    5.1    Orthographic projections
           5.1.1 First and third angle projection
           5.1.2 Principal views: Methods for obtaining orthographic views, projection
                   of lines, angles and plane surfaces, analysis in three views,
                   projection of curved lines and surfaces, object orientation and
                   selection of views for best representation, full and hidden lines
           5.1.3 Orthographic drawings: Making an orthographic drawing, visualizing
                   objects (Pictorial view) from the given views
           5.1.4 Interpretation of adjacent areas, true-length lines, representation of
                   holes, conventional practices
    5.2    Sectional views: Full, half, offset, broken (Partial), rotated/aligned, revolved,
           removed (Detail) sections, phantom of hidden section, specifying cutting
           planes for sections, convention practices
    5.3    Auxiliary views: Basic concept and use, drawing methods and types,
           symmetrical and unilateral auxiliary views, auxiliary sectional views

6   Developments and Intersections                                              (7 hours)
    6.1    Introduction and projection of solids with points transfer
    6.2    Developments: General concepts and practical considerations, triangulation
           method for approximate development of surfaces of a right/oblique; Prism,
           cylinder, pyramid, cone, prism and cylinder cut by oblique planes,
           frustum/truncated pyramid and cone, transition pieces for connecting
           different shapes and sphere
    6.3    Intersections: Lines of intersection of geometric surfaces, piercing point of a
           line and a geometric solid, intersection lines of two planes, intersections of
           – prism and prism, cylinder and prism, cylinder and cylinder, pyramid and
           prism, cone and prism, pyramid and cylinder, cone and cylinder

7    Pictorial Drawings                                                       (7 hours)
    7.1    Classifications: Advantages and disadvantages
    7.2    Isometric view
           7.2.1 Axonometric projection
           7.2.2 Isometric projection and isometric drawing (View)
           7.2.3 Isometric and non-isometric lines; Isometric and non-isometric
                   surfaces
           7.2.4 Angles in isometric drawing
           7.2.5 Circles and circular arcs in isometric and non-isometric surfaces
                   (Slopes)
           7.2.6 Irregular curves in isometric drawing
           7.2.7 Isometric sectional views
    7.3    Oblique drawing
           7.3.1 Procedure for making an oblique drawing
           7.3.2 Rules for placing objects in oblique drawing
           7.3.3 Angles, circles and circular arcs in oblique drawing
    7.4    Perspective projection
           7.4.1 Terms used in perspective projection
           7.4.2 Parallel and angular perspective
           7.4.3 Selection of station point
           7.4.4 Perspective projection of right prism and pyramid solid

Assignments
    1.   Geometrical construction
    2.   Descriptive geometry
    3.   Multi-view Projection I
    4.   Multi-view Projection II
    5.   Surface development and intersection
    6.   Isometric drawing
    7.   Oblique drawing and perspective projection

Practical                                                                 (60 hours)
    1.    Drawing sheet layout, freehand lettering, scale, common graphical
          symbols, sketching of parallel lines, circles, dimensioning
    2.    Geometrical construction (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    3.    Descriptive geometry I (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    4.    Descriptive geometry II (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    5.    Multiview drawings I (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    6.     Multiview drawings II (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    7.     Multiview, sectional drawings and dimensioning (Sketch and instrumental
           drawing)
    8.     Auxiliary view, sectional drawings and dimensioning (Sketch and
           instrumental drawing)
    9.     Projection of regular geometrical solids with point transfer (Sketch and
           instrumental drawing)
    10.    Surface development of solids I (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    11.    Surface development of solids II (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    12.    Intersection of solids (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    13.    Isometric drawing I (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    14.    Isometric drawing II (Sketch and instrumental drawing)
    15.    Oblique drawing and perspective projection (Sketch and instrumental
           drawing)

Reference
    1.    Luzadder, W.J., Duff, J.M. (1989). Fundamentals of engineering drawing:
          With an introduction to interactive computer graphics for design and
          production (Latest Edition). Prentice-Hall.
    2.    French, T.E., Vierck, C.J., Foster, R.J. (1993). Engineering drawing and
          graphic technology (Latest Edition). McGraw-Hill.
    3.    Giesecke, F.E., Mitchell, A., Spencer, H.C., Dygdon, J.T. (2016). Technical
          drawing with engineering graphics. Peachpit Press.
    4.    Bhatt, N.D. (2023). Elementary engineering drawing. Charotar Publishing
          House.
    5.    Gill, P.S. (2016). Engineering drawing. S. K. Kataria & Sons.
    6.    Dhawan, R.K. (2019). A textbook of engineering drawing. S. Chand and
          Company.
    7.    Luintel, M. C. (2021). Engineering Drawing I. Heritage Publishers &
          Distributors.
    8.    Luintel, M. C. (2020). Engineering Drawing II. Heritage Publishers &
          Distributors.
