                     ENGINEERING MATHEMATICS II
                                       ENSH 151



Lecture       :3                                                                  Year : I
Tutorial      :2                                                                  Part : II
Practical     :0

Course Objectives:
After completion of the course students will be able to apply knowledge of partial
differentiation, multiple integrals, vector calculus, optimization, matrices and infinite
series in their corresponding study area.

1    Calculus of Two and More Variables                                        (6 hours)
      1.1   Partial differentiation
            1.1.1 Partial derivatives of first and higher order
            1.1.2 Homogeneous function: Euler’s theorem for two and three variables
            1.1.3 Total derivatives and differentials, differentiation of composite and
                    implicit functions
            1.1.4 Jacobians and their properties
      1.2   Extreme values of two and three variables. Lagrange’s multiplier
      1.3   Application in optimization of function of two variables in one constraint

2    Multiple Integrals                                                        (7 hours)
      2.1   Double integrals in Cartesian and Polar form, change of order of integration
      2.2   Triple integrals in Cartesian, cylindrical and spherical coordinates
      2.3   Area, volume, moment of inertia, mass and centroid by double and triple
            integrals

3    Vector Calculus                                                           (12 hours)
      3.1   Review of scalar and vector products, scalar and vector triple product,
            scalar and vector product of four vectors
      3.2   Vector differentiation and integration, their geometrical meaning, velocity
            and acceleration
      3.3   Vector differential operators: Gradient, directional derivatives, divergence
            and curl
      3.4   Line integrals, independent of path, conservative and irrotational vector
            fields, scalar potential
      3.5   Introduction to Green’s theorem and its application
      3.6   Surface integrals, calculation of flux
     3.7   Volume integrals, Gauss divergence theorem (Without proof) and its
           application in evaluation of surface integrals
     3.8   Introduction to Stoke’s theorem and its application

4    Laplace Transform                                                       (7 hours)
     4.1   Definition of Laplace transform, condition for existence, Laplace transforms
           of some elementary functions, properties of Laplace transform, shifting and
           change of scale properties
     4.2   Inverse Laplace transform, uniqueness of inverse Laplace transform,
           properties of inverse Laplace transform
     4.3   Laplace transform of derivatives and integral, multiplication and division by
           tn the convolution theorem
     4.4   Laplace transform of Heaviside’s unit function, Dirac-delta function and
           periodic functions
     4.5   Application of Laplace transform to ordinary differential equations

5    Matrices                                                                (8 hours)
     5.1   Review of algebra of real and complex matrices
     5.2   Rank of matrices and its application in system of linear equations
     5.3   Vector space, linear dependence and independence
     5.4   Eigen values: Cayley Hamilton theorem and its applications
     5.5   Eigen vectors, diagonalization of matrices
     5.6   Reduction of quadratic forms into canonical forms (Three variables only)

6    Solution of Differential Equation in Series and Special Functions (5 hours)
     6.1   Power series method
     6.2   Bessel’s functions: Introduction, properties and application
     6.3   Legendre’s function: Introduction, properties and application

Tutorial                                                                      (30 hours)
     1.  Techniques of partial differentiation, differentiation of composite and implicit
         functions, total derivatives, and related exercises
     2. Exercises related to Euler’s theorem
     3. Exercises related to extreme values of two and three variables
     4. Change of order of integration in multiple integrals
     5. Exercises related to application of double and triple integrals in finding area,
         volume, moment of inertia, mass and centroid
     6. Examples related to revision of scalar and vector product of two and three
         vectors
     7. Problems on gradient, directional derivatives, divergence and curl
     8. Exercises on line integrals, independent of path
     9. Exercises on surface integrals
     10. Exercises on Green’s theorem, verification and application in calculating line
         integrals
     11. Verification of Stoke’s theorem, application
     12. Verification of Gauss’ Divergence theorem, and application in calculating
         surface integrals
     13. Exercises related to Laplace transforms
     14. Exercises on inverse Laplace transforms
     15. Problems related to application of Laplace transform to ordinary differential
         equations
     16. Examples related to Laplace transform of Heaviside’s unit function, Dirac-
         delta function and periodic functions
     17. Rank and solution of simultaneous equations
     18. Eigen values and Eigen vectors, diagonalization problems
     19. Problems related to reduction of quadratic forms into canonical forms
     20. Exercises related to Bessel’s function and Legendre’s polynomial

Final Exam
The questions will cover all the chapters in the syllabus. The evaluation scheme will be
as indicated in the table below:
       Chapter                        Hours                    Mark distribution*
          1                             6                               8
         2                             7                                8
         3                            12                               18
         4                             7                                8
         5                             8                               12
         6                             5                                6
         Total                        45                               60
* There may be minor deviation in marks distribution.

References
    1.   Kreyszig, E. (2011). Advanced engineering mathematics. John Wiley &
         Sons.
    2.   Jeffrey, A. (2002). Advanced engineering mathematics. Academic Press.
    3.   O’Neil, P.V. (2011). Advanced engineering mathematics. Cengage
         Learning.
    4.   Sastry, S.S. (2008). Engineering mathematics (Vols. I–II). PHI Learning.
    5.   Wylie, C.R, Barrett, L.C. (1995). Advanced engineering mathematics (Latest
         Edition). McGraw-Hill.
    6.   Dutta, D. (2006). Textbook of engineering mathematics (Vols. I–II). New
         Age International.
