                      PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
                                       ENSH 304

Lecture       :3                                                                 Year : III
Tutorial      :1                                                                  Part : I
Practical     :0

Course Objectives:
The objective of this course is to equip students with foundational knowledge in
probability and statistics, focusing on core concepts essential for engineering
applications. Students will develop essential skills in statistical data analysis, enabling
them to apply various statistical techniques to address real-world engineering
challenges. Additionally, the course emphasizes the interpretation and effective
communication of statistical results, preparing students to make informed, data-driven
decisions in their professional practice.

1    Descriptive Statistics and Basic Probability                              (6 hours)
      1.1   Introduction to statistics and its importance in engineering
      1.2   Measure of central tendency and measure of variation
      1.3   Graphical representation of data: Histograms, box plots and scatter plots
      1.4   Basic probability concepts, additive law, multiplicative law
      1.5   Conditional probability and Bayes’ theorem

2    Probability Distributions and Sampling Distribution                       (14 hours)
      2.1   Random variables: Discrete and continuous
      2.2   Expectation and variance of discrete and continuous random variables
      2.3   Discrete probability distributions: Binomial, Poisson, negative Binomial
      2.4   Continuous probability distributions: Normal, Gamma, Chi-Square
      2.5   Population and sample
      2.6   Sampling distribution of mean and proportion
      2.7   Central limit theorem

3    Statistical Inference                                                     (14 hours)
      3.1   Point estimations and properties of estimators
      3.2   Confidence intervals for mean and proportions
      3.3   Hypothesis testing, parametric and non-parametric tests, procedure of
            hypothesis
      3.4   Hypothesis testing of mean (Single mean, two means, paired t-test and
            one-way)
      3.5   Goodness of fit tests and independence of attributes (Chi-square and
            Kolmogorov–Smirnov test)
4    Correlation and Regression                                             (6 hours)
      4.1   Correlation analysis and test of linear correlation
      4.2   Simple regression analysis, the concept of explained, unexplained, and
            total
      4.3   Multiple regression analysis

5    Statistical Quality Control                                            (5 hours)
      5.1   Quality control and its importance in engineering
      5.2   Control charts for variables (X-bar, R-chart, P-chat)
      5.3   Six sigma concepts

Tutorial                                                                    (15 hours)
    1. Visualize data, compute central tendency, and variance in engineering proble
         ms using computer software
    2. Solve different engineering problems involving probability
    3. Solve different engineering problems involving discrete probability distribution
         and its interpretation
    4. Solve different engineering problems involving continuous probability distributi
         on and its interpretation
    5. Analyze numerical engineering datasets, perform normality tests, confidence i
         ntervals, significance tests of means, and ANOVA
    6. Analyze categorical engineering datasets, perform crosstabulation, proportion
          tests, Chi-Square tests, and draw conclusions using computer software
    7. Calculate the correlation coefficient and perform correlation tests on engineeri
         ng data
    8. Fit and interpret simple/multiple regression models on engineering data using
         computer software
    9. Use control charts for process monitoring on sample engineering data.
    10. Create control charts using computer software

Final Exam
The questions will cover all the chapters in the syllabus. The evaluation scheme will be
as indicated in the table below:
          Chapter                        Hours                   Marks distribution*
              1                              6                            10
              2                             14                            15
              3                             14                            20
              4                              6                            10
              5                              5                             5
           Total                            45                            60
  * There may be minor deviation in marks distribution.
References
    1.   Ronald, E.W., Raymond, H.M., Sharon, L.M. (2012). Probability & Statistics
         for Engineers & Scientists (9th edition). Boston USA: Prentice Hall.
    2.   Richard A.J. (2018). Probability and Statistics for Engineers (9th edition).
         Edinburgh Gate: Pearson Education Limited
    3.   Sheldon M.R. (2009). Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers
         and Scientists (4th edition). London: Elsevier Inc.
    4.   Jay L.D. (2012). Probability and Statistics for Engineering and Sciences.
         Boston: Thomson Brooks/Cole
    5.   Brian S.E., Ibrsten H. (2010). A Handbook of Statistical Analyses Using R
         (2nd edition). London: CRC Press Taylor & Francis Croup
    6.   Andy F. (2018). Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics (5th
         edition). London: SAGE Publications.
